In this article we list down the most widely used time-series forecasting methods which can be used in Python with just a single line of code:

Autoregression (AR)
The autoregression (AR) method models as a linear function of the observations at prior time steps.

The notation for the model involves specifying the order of the model p as a parameter to the AR function.

from statsmodel.tsa.ar_model import AR

Autoregressive Moving Average (ARMA)
The (ARMA) method combines both Autoregression (AR) and Moving Average (MA) models.

from statsmodel.tsa.arima_model import ARMA

Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA)
(ARIMA) method combines both Autoregression (AR) and Moving Average (MA) models as well as a differencing pre-processing step of the sequence to make the sequence stationary, called integration

from statsmodel.tsa.arima_model import ARIMA

Seasonal Autoregressive Integrated Moving-Average (SARIMA)
The Seasonal Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (SARIMA) method models the next step in the sequence as a linear function of the differenced observations, errors, differenced seasonal observations, and seasonal errors at prior time steps.

It combines the ARIMA model with the ability to perform the same autoregression, differencing, and moving average modeling at the seasonal level.

from statsmodel.tsa.statespace.sarimax import SARIMAX

SEE ALSO

DEVELOPERS CORNER
How I Created A ML Model That Identifies Hand Gestures
Seasonal Autoregressive Integrated Moving-Average with Exogenous Regressors (SARIMAX)
The Seasonal Autoregressive Integrated Moving-Average with Exogenous Regressors (SARIMAX) is an extension of the SARIMA model that also includes the modeling of exogenous variables.

The SARIMAX method can also be used to model the subsumed models with exogenous variables, such as ARX, MAX, ARMAX, and ARIMAX

from statsmodel.tsa.statespace.sarimax import SARIMAX

Vector Autoregression (VAR)
The Vector Autoregression method uses an AR model. It is the generalization of AR to multiple parallel time series.

from statsmodel.tsa.vector_ar.var_model import VAR

Vector Autoregression Moving-Average (VARMA)
It is the generalization of ARMA to multiple parallel time series, e.g. multivariate time series.

from statsmodel.tsa.statespace.varmax import VARMAX

Vector Autoregression Moving-Average with Exogenous Regressors (VARMAX)
The Vector Autoregression Moving-Average with Exogenous Regressors (VARMAX) is an extension of the VARMA model that also includes the modeling of exogenous variables. It is a multivariate version of the ARMAX method.

Holt Winter’s Exponential Smoothing (HWES)
The Holt Winter’s Exponential Smoothing (HWES) is an exponentially weighted linear function of observations at prior time steps, taking trends and seasonality into account.

from statsmodel.tsa.holtwinters import ExponentialSmoothing
